OSDOCS-19969: Gateway API backendTLSPolicy for securing HTTPRoutes (#112677)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/securing-client-connections-edge-tls.adoc

      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: app1-example-com-cert
  - name: app2-https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    hostname: app2.example.com
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: app2-example-com-cert
----

** To secure wildcard domains, configure a single listener with a wildcard certificate:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: wildcard-gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: example
  listeners:
  - name: wildcard-https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    hostname: "*.example.com"
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: wildcard-cert
----

** To secure all domains, configure a listener that listens for all routes regardless of hostname:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: default-gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: example
  listeners:
  - name: all-https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: default-cert

> ----

Reviewer: I would reccomend adding the `metadata.namespace` for all the above gateways to `openshift-ingress` and for the `gatewayClassName` some sort of disclaimer that mentions that it should match your gatewayClass name. I usually use `openshift-default` but `example` is also fine

Author: Got it! I've made these changes to the module

** To use a secret in a different namespace, configure your listener and create a corresponding `ReferenceGrant`:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: cross-namespace-example
  namespace: example-ns1
spec:
  gatewayClassName: example
  listeners:
  - name: https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    hostname: "*.example.com"
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: wildcard-cert
        namespace: example-ns2
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: ReferenceGrant
metadata:
  name: allow-ns1-reference
  namespace: example-ns2
spec:
  from:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    namespace: example-ns1
  to:
  - group: ""
    kind: Secret

> ----

Reviewer: same issue as above with the referenceGrant creation

Author: Thanks!  Got that fixed

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ingress_load_balancing/configuring_ingress_cluster_traffic/routing-http-requests-to-services.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="securing-client-connections-edge-tls_{context}"]
= Securing client connections with edge TLS termination

[role="_abstract"]
To secure traffic from clients to your gateway, configure a listener with the `Terminate` TLS mode and a `certificateRef` to a {product-title} secret. This terminates encryption at the gateway for `HTTPRoute` traffic targeting the listener, and forwards unencrypted traffic to the destination service.

.Prerequisites
* You have created an `HTTPRoute` custom resource (CR) that targets your gateway backend.

> 

Reviewer: since all these gateways point to some secret, could also mention this as a pre-requisite confirming that the secrets are created before applying the gateway YAML

Author: Thanks! But this applies more to the securing-client-connections-edge-tls.adoc module. I've added the prerequisite there.

Reviewer 2: In one example more than one secret needs to be created.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ingress_load_balancing/configuring_ingress_cluster_traffic/routing-http-requests-to-services.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="securing-client-connections-edge-tls_{context}"]

> = Securing client connections with edge TLS termination

Reviewer 2: Somehwere it has to be clear that **both** the HTTPRoute and the listeners need to be created in order to do edge termination, and they need to be linked appropriately **via the intersecting hostnames.**

Author: Thanks! I've updated both the abstract and the prerequisites sections to explicitly state that both resources must exist and that their configured hostnames must intersect for the edge termination to connect properly.

----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: default-gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  gatewayClassName: openshift-default
  listeners:
  - name: all-https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: default-cert
----

** To use a secret in a different namespace, configure your listener and create a corresponding `ReferenceGrant`:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: cross-namespace-example
  namespace: example-ns1
spec:
  gatewayClassName: openshift-default
  listeners:
  - name: https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    hostname: "*.example.com"
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: wildcard-cert
        namespace: example-ns2
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ReferenceGrant
metadata:
  name: allow-ns1-reference
  namespace: example-ns2
spec:
  from:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    namespace: example-ns1
  to:
  - group: ""
    kind: Secret
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> Unlike standard {product-title} routes that use namespace-wide annotations for cross-namespace permissions, Gateway API uses the `ReferenceGrant` object to authorize access. When configuring a `ReferenceGrant`, you must explicitly set the `from` group to `gateway.networking.k8s.io`.

Reviewer 2: This is only true for this case, not all cases.

```suggestion
Unlike standard {product-title} routes that use namespace-wide annotations for cross-namespace permissions, Gateway API uses the `ReferenceGrant` object to authorize access.  This `ReferenceGrant` grants access from the Gateway in one namespace to the Secret in another namespace.
```

Author: Excellent! I've updated the note with your exact phrasing (just made some formatting adjustments)

====
--

.Verification

* Verify that the `Gateway` custom resource was successfully configured and is listening on port 443 by checking its listener conditions. The following example checks the `tls-basic` sample gateway:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get gateway tls-basic -n openshift-ingress -o jsonpath='{.status.listeners[*].conditions}'

Reviewer 2: This isn't that helpful unless the valid conditions are also listed.

Author: Yikes! Great point! I've added an .Example output block and a note explaining that users should look for the Accepted and Programmed conditions to be True.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ingress_load_balancing/configuring_gateway_api/securing-httproutes.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="securing-client-connections-edge-tls_{context}"]
= Securing client connections with edge TLS termination

[role="_abstract"]
To secure traffic from clients to your gateway, configure a listener with the `Terminate` TLS mode and a `certificateRef` to an {product-title} secret. 

This configuration terminates encryption at the gateway for `HTTPRoute` custom resource (CR) traffic that targets the listener, and forwards unencrypted traffic to the destination service. You must have both an `HTTPRoute` CR and a gateway listener configured with intersecting hostnames for edge termination to successfully connect.

.Prerequisites

> * You created an `HTTPRoute` CR that references your gateway. The hostnames defined in this route must match or intersect with the hostnames you plan to configure on your gateway listeners.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

* You created an `HTTPRoute` CR that references your gateway. The hostnames defined in this route must match or intersect with the hostnames you plan to configure on your gateway listeners.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ingress_load_balancing/configuring_gateway_api/securing-httproutes.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="securing-client-connections-edge-tls_{context}"]
= Securing client connections with edge TLS termination

[role="_abstract"]

> To secure traffic from clients to your gateway, configure a listener with the `Terminate` TLS mode and a `certificateRef` to a {product-title} secret. 

Reviewer 2: {product-title} is OpenShift or Red Hat OpenShift?  If OpenShift, change the "a" to "an".
```suggestion
To secure traffic from clients to your gateway, configure a listener with the `Terminate` TLS mode and a `certificateRef` to an {product-title} secret. 
```

Author: Smart! Got it fixed

> This configuration terminates encryption at the gateway for `HTTPRoute` traffic targeting the listener, and forwards unencrypted traffic to the destination service. For edge termination to successfully connect, you must have both an `HTTPRoute` and a gateway listener configured with intersecting hostnames.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This configuration terminates encryption at the gateway for `HTTPRoute` traffic targeting the listener, and forwards unencrypted traffic to the destination service. You must have both an `HTTPRoute` and a gateway listener configured with intersecting hostnames for edge termination to successfully connect.
```

.Prerequisites

> * You have created an `HTTPRoute` custom resource (CR) that references your gateway. The hostnames defined in this route must match or intersect with the hostnames you plan to configure on your gateway listeners.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

* You created an `HTTPRoute` custom resource (CR) that references your gateway. The hostnames defined in this route must match, or intersect, with the hostnames you plan to configure on your gateway listeners.
```

> * You have created a `Secret` resource containing your TLS certificate and key in the appropriate namespace.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* You created a `Secret` resource containing your TLS certificate and key in the appropriate namespace.
```
what does "appropriate" mean? this is kind of meaningless here. tell me what namespace i need to use

> [NOTE]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[IMPORTANT]
```

====

> The configuration examples in this procedure use `openshift-default` as the `gatewayClassName`. When creating your `Gateway` resource, ensure that this value matches the specific `GatewayClass` name configured on your cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The configuration examples in this procedure use `openshift-default` as the `gatewayClassName`. When creating your `Gateway` custom resource (CR), ensure that the `gatewayClassName` aligns with the `GatewayClass` in your cluster configuration.
```

====

.Procedure

> * Create a `Gateway` custom resource (CR) file and configure the listeners based on your domain requirements, and then apply it to your cluster:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Create a `Gateway` custom resource (CR) file and configure the listeners based on your domain requirements, and then apply it to your cluster by using one of the following examples:
```

+
--

> ** To secure multiple domains, configure separate listeners for each domain with their respective certificates:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** To secure multiple domains, configure separate listeners for each domain with their respective certificates by using the following example:
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: tls-basic
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  gatewayClassName: openshift-default
  listeners:
  - name: app1-https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    hostname: app1.example.com
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: app1-example-com-cert
  - name: app2-https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    hostname: app2.example.com
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: app2-example-com-cert
----

** To secure wildcard domains, configure a single listener with a wildcard certificate:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: wildcard-gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  gatewayClassName: openshift-default
  listeners:
  - name: wildcard-https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443

>     hostname: "*.example.com"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    hostname: "hostname.example.com"
```
i think the star here is rendering as an open bold formatting; escape it or just remove it

    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: wildcard-cert
----
+

> You can configure both specific domain listeners and wildcard listeners on the same gateway. Specific matches happen before wildcard matches, so a request to `app1.example.com` uses the specific certificate rather than the wildcard certificate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can configure both specific domain listeners and wildcard listeners on the same Gateway CR. Specific matches happen before wildcard matches, so a request to `app1.example.com` uses the specific certificate rather than the wildcard certificate.
```

> ** To secure all domains, configure a listener that listens for all routes regardless of hostname:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** To secure all domains, configure a listener that listens for all routes regardless of hostname by using the following example:
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: default-gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  gatewayClassName: openshift-default
  listeners:
  - name: all-https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: default-cert
----

> ** To use a secret in a different namespace, configure your listener and create a corresponding `ReferenceGrant`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** To use a Secret in a different namespace, configure your listener and create a corresponding `ReferenceGrant` by using the following example:
```
Kubernetes Secret?

Author: good catch

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: cross-namespace-example
  namespace: example-ns1
spec:
  gatewayClassName: openshift-default
  listeners:
  - name: https
    protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443

>     hostname: "*.example.com"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    hostname: "hostname.example.com"
```

    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - kind: Secret
        group: ""
        name: wildcard-cert
        namespace: example-ns2
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ReferenceGrant
metadata:
  name: allow-ns1-reference
  namespace: example-ns2
spec:
  from:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    namespace: example-ns1
  to:
  - group: ""
    kind: Secret
----
+

> [NOTE]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ====

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> Unlike standard {product-title} routes that use namespace-wide annotations for cross-namespace permissions, Gateway API uses the `ReferenceGrant` object to authorize access. This `ReferenceGrant` grants access from the `Gateway` in one namespace to the `Secret` in another namespace.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike standard {product-title} routes that use namespace-wide annotations for cross-namespace permissions, Gateway API uses the `ReferenceGrant` object to authorize access. This `ReferenceGrant` gives access from the `Gateway` CR in one namespace to the Secret in another namespace.
```
pick one way throughout for a Kubernetes Secret, backticks or not; it is a built-in resource, so I see it both ways in the NW docs

> ====

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

--

.Verification

> * Verify that the `Gateway` custom resource was successfully configured and is listening on port 443 by checking its listener conditions. The following example checks the `tls-basic` sample gateway:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Verify that the `Gateway` CR was successfully configured and is listening on port 443 by checking its listener conditions. The following example checks the `tls-basic` example `Gateway` CR:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get gateway tls-basic -n openshift-ingress -o yaml
----
+
.Example output
[source,yaml]
----

> status:

Reviewer 3: missing the port and protocol, try:

status:
  listeners:
  - name: app1-https
    port: 443 
    protocol: HTTPS
    supportedKinds:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: HTTPRoute
    attachedRoutes: 1
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2026-06-24T15:00:00Z"
      message: "The listener is valid"
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Accepted
      status: "True"
      type: Accepted
    - lastTransitionTime: "2026-06-24T15:00:00Z"
      message: "The listener is ready to accept traffic"
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Programmed
      status: "True"
      type: Programmed

Author: Thanks! I added your updated messages and the supportedKinds list. But I left out the port and protocol. The gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1 API spec only includes those fields in the spec block, using just the name field to map the ListenerStatus back to the configuration.

  listeners:
  - attachedRoutes: 1
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2026-06-24T15:00:00Z"
      message: ""
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Accepted
      status: "True"
      type: Accepted
    - lastTransitionTime: "2026-06-24T15:00:00Z"
      message: ""
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Programmed
      status: "True"
      type: Programmed
    name: app1-https
----
+

> Verify that the `Accepted` and `Programmed` conditions for your listeners both have a status of `True`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
idk, i don't think you need to say this again; if you really want it in, then i would also verify the port and protocol since you list it above

Author: Good call, definitely redundant, so I went ahead and deleted it. I skipped adding the port and protocol verification since those fields aren't  returned in the Gateway API status block anyway.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ingress_load_balancing/configuring_ingress_cluster_traffic/routing-http-requests-to-services.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="securing-client-connections-edge-tls_{context}"]
= Securing client connections with edge TLS termination

[role="_abstract"]

> To secure traffic from clients to your gateway, configure a listener with edge TLS termination. This decrypts traffic at the perimeter before routing it to backend services, ensuring secure external access while maintaining fast internal performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To secure traffic from clients to your gateway, configure a listener with both TLS mode terminate and a certificateRef consisting of an OpenShift secret. This configuration terminates encryption at the gateway for HTTPRoute traffic that targets that listener, and then forwards unencrypted traffic to the destination service.
```

Author: Thanks, I updated this abstract with a few modifications to comply with our doc guidelines

> .Procedure

Reviewer 2: The HTTPRoute example has to be done for all the examples.  How can this be more clearly represented?  

In my proposal, it seemed more clear because the section name was: 
Creating an HTTPRoute with edge TLS termination
but there were subsections:
Subsection: Creating listeners to secure multiple domains with edge termination
Subsection:  Creating a listener to secure wildcard domains with edge termination
Subsection:  Creating a listener to secure all domains with edge termination
Subsection:  Creating a listener that uses a secret in a different namespace for edge termination

Author: This is a great example of how sometimes serving the modularization standards doesn't serve the reader. I updated this section. I'll let you know when I push changes so you can see what I did.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what you did to clarify this?

Author: Hi, thanks! Just to clear things up... To comply with our modularization standards, we are only allowed one procedure per module, and we cannot nest procedural sub-headings. To ensure we didn't lose any of your edge-termination use cases, I grouped them all under the single "Securing client connections with edge TLS termination" module.

If you look at the .Procedure section of that file, you will see that I converted your four subsections into a list of configuration options (e.g., 'To secure multiple domains...', 'To secure wildcard domains...'). This allows users to follow one continuous procedure while choosing the specific listener configuration that matches their needs.

* Create an `HTTPRoute` custom resource (CR) with selected hostnames, using a gateway as its `parentRef`.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: <httproute-name>
  namespace: <namespace>
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: <gateway-name>
    namespace: openshift-ingress
  hostnames:
  - frontend.example.com
  - app.example.com
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: <backend-service-name>
      port: 8080

> ----

Reviewer 2: This was omitted.
```suggestion
----

Other matches, filters, timeouts, and traffic weight rules can be added as needed for traffic management, as described in <link to section “Routing HTTP requests to services”>

```

Author: I omitted this because DITA doesn't allow links in reusable modules. Instead, I've included the link in the assembly's Additional Resources section.

Reviewer 2: This is in the wrong place now anyway, but in the future, why not just do this:

Other matches, filters, timeouts, and traffic weight rules can be added as needed for traffic management, as described in the section called “Routing HTTP requests to services”.
